---
title: "CS 2381 Spring 2024: Syllabus"
date: "2024-01-08"
---

{{< lead >}}
Data Structures and Intermediate Programming
{{< /lead >}}

[&larr; Back to Course Site](../)

<blockquote>
<b>Course Catalog:</b><br>
A second programming course which reinforces the programming
constructs learned in CS 2370 and covers more advanced programming
techniques. Students learn about the client/server paradigm, how to
create graphical user interfaces and event-driven program structure,
and how to use basic data structures such as stacks, queues, lists,
and trees. Students write applications using basic networking and
multithreading techniques. Three lecture hours and 2 hours of computer
lab. Falls and Springs.
<br>Prereq: CS2370
</blockquote>

# Course Info

# Course Info

 - Instructor: Nat Tuck 
   - Email: <nathaniel.tuck@plymouth.edu>
   - Office: D&M 305
 - Lecture: Mon, Wed at 08:40-09:55am in D&M 442
 - Lab: Friday at 08:15-09:55am in D&M 404
 - Course Site: https://homework.quest/ click "cs2381"
 - Final Exam: Mon Dec 11th, 11am-1:30pm in D&M 442
 - Office Hours: See course site

## Student Learning Outcomes

Successful students will: 

 - Understand how to structure data in computer programs, including the roles 
   of several common data structures.
 - Be comfortable writing medium-sized programs in a modern programming language
   like Java.
 - Be able to determine the computational complexity of many operations and algorithms.
 - Practice reading and understanding computer code written by
   themselves and others.
 - Consider creative solutions to programming problems.

## Texts

There is no required textbook for this course.

Recommended references:

 - [Think Java](https://greenteapress.com/wp/think-java-2e/)
 - [Wikibook: Data Structures](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Data_Structures)
 - [Open Data Structures](https://opendatastructures.org/ods-python/)
 - [Modern Java in Action](https://www.manning.com/books/modern-java-in-action)

# Grading

<table class="table table-striped">
  <thead>
    <tr>
	  <td>Thing</td>
	  <td>Weight</td>
	</tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
	<tr>
	  <td>Labs</td>
	  <td>50</td>
	</tr>
    <tr>
	  <td>Homework</td>
	  <td>25</td>
	</tr>
    <tr>
	  <td>Final Exam</td>
	  <td>25</td>
	</tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

The number of points available in an assessment may (or may not)
exceed the denominator used in the grade calculation. For example, if
the final exam offers 104 points out of 100, then a perfect score
would count as 26% towards the final course grade.

**Letter grades**

&ge; 93 &rarr; A, &ge; 90 &rarr; A-, <br>
&ge; 87 &rarr; B+, &ge; 83 &rarr; B, &ge; 80 &rarr; B-, <br>
&ge; 77 &rarr; C+, &ge; 73 &rarr; C, &ge; 70 &rarr; C-, <br>
&ge; 67 &rarr; D+, &ge; 63 &rarr; D, &ge; 60 &rarr; D-, <br>
else (&lt; 60) &rarr; F

**Labs and Homework**

Each week there will be a lab assignment to complete during the lab
period and a homework assignment to complete outside of class.

You may be assigned to work with a partner, in which case pair
programming is required. In assigning partners, sometimes there ends
up being a team of one or three.

All team members are responsible for and get credit for any work
submitted as a team. Any team member who believes their teammates
aren't doing their share of the work can leave a team and work alone
until teams are next reassigned, but only such that the remaining
members of the team have at least four days to complete any assignment
before the due date.

Labs and homework will be provided through an online web application
called Inkfish and must be submitted through the same system. Emailed
work will not be accepted unless requested beforehand.

A portion of your lab grade may be generated by an automatic grading
script which runs when you submit your work. Unless there is a clear
bug 🪳 in the script, the script output is that portion of your grade
and will not be adjusted manually. You are being graded on getting the
script to give you points. You should review the output, make
corrections, and resubmit before the deadline if you are unhappy with
the script results.

Script grades will be reduced if you submit work inconsistent with the
text or spirit of the assignment, such as hard-coding outputs that
should be calculated.

**Final Exam**

The final exam will be on paper. Be prepared to write both English and code.

**Grade Appeals**

If you think you recieved an incorrect grade, send me an email
describing why your grade is wrong and how you think it should be
corrected.

If the grade isn't clearly wrong, I will ask you to stop by my office
hours so we can discuss the issue in more detail.

**Fair Grading Policy**

All grading in this class is subject to the university [Fair Grading Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/).

**Late Work**

Labs are to be completed in lab and are due by the end of the lab
period. Late labs will not be accepted.

Homeworks submitted after the deadline loses 1% per hour late.

If you are unable to submit an assignment on time due to a
circumstance covered by the university [Excused Absence Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/)
then you can request an extension. If you are granted an extension and
submit by the extended deadline then the late penalty will be removed.
If such an extension could reasonably be requested before the
assignment deadline then it must be.

**Late Registration**

If you register late for the course please contact the professor to
discuss completing any missed assignments as soon as possible.

**Course Evaluations**

Course evaluations can be a valuable tool to determine how the
semester went. They're more useful with a higher response rate.

To encourage more responses, each class has the chance to earn a 1%
bonus to everyone's final grade. This bonus applies if at least 75%
of the students complete their evaluations by 10am on the Monday
of finals week.

# Resources

## Tutoring

There is evening tutoring in the lab classroom. See the course website
for more details. The [PASS Office](
https://www.plymouth.edu/academics/plymouth-academic-support-services)
also offers individual tutoring.

## Accomodations

Plymouth State University is committed to providing students with
documented disabilities equal access to all university programs and
facilities. If you think you have a disability requiring
accommodations, you should contact Campus Accessibility Services
(CAS), located in Speare (535-3300) to determine whether you are
eligible for such accommodations. Academic accommodations will only be
considered for students who have registered with CAS. If you have
authorized CAS to electronically deliver a Letter of Accommodations
for this course, please communicate with your instructor to review
your accommodations.

# Academic Integrity

Please carefully read and be familiar with the unversity [Academic
Integrity Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/).
Especially don't do any of the things in the list of examples of
academic integrity violations. Make sure to review the penalties for
repeated offenses.

The primary subject of this class is writing small computer programs.
In order to learn that skill, you need to practice it by completing
the programming assignments by writing code yourself (or with your
team on team assignments).

The following things are obvious cheating:

 - Submitting code that wasn't written by you (or your team).
   - Two exceptions: Starter code, small examples in the official
     documention for the programming language or library we are using.
 - Sharing your soluton code with other students (except teammates).
 - Looking at other solutions to this or similar problems.
 - Accessing unauthorized resources in a lab or exam.

Cheating will be handled as follows:

 - During an exam or lab, if you are caught cheating or acting in a
   way that appears to facilitate cheating (e.g. using unauthorized
   electronics) you will be asked to leave and will not be allowed to
   complete the assignment.
 - The default penalty for cheating on any assignment is zero grade on
   that assignment.

Partner assignment are expected to be done working together. You have
at least some responsibility for any work submitted for your team.

You may not post solutions for assignments in this class publicly. 


## Tentative Schedule

The initial plan is for homework to be due at 11:59pm on Thursday.

{{< schedule >}}

<tr>
	<td>1</td>
	<td>Jan 22</td>
	<td>Intros: Class, Java, Data</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>2</td>
	<td>Jan 29</td>
	<td>Types, Design Templates</td>
	<td>Lab 01</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>3</td>
	<td>Feb 5</td>
	<td>Lists, Generics 🪳</td>
	<td>Lab 02</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>4</td>
	<td>Feb 12 †</td>
	<td>Arrays, ArrayList</td>
	<td>Lab 03</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>5</td>
	<td>Feb 19</td>
	<td>Stacks</td>
	<td>Lab 04, Midterm Exam</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>6</td>
	<td>Feb 26</td>
	<td>Queues</td>
	<td>Lab 05</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>7</td>
	<td>Mar 4</td>
	<td>Binary Trees</td>
	<td>Lab 06</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>-</td>
	<td>Mar 11</td>
	<td colspan="2" style="text-align: center">---- Spring Break ----</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>8</td>
	<td>Mar 18</td>
	<td>Sets, BSTs</td>
	<td>Lab 07</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>9</td>
	<td>Mar 25</td>
	<td>Priority Queue</td>
	<td>Lab 08</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>10</td>
	<td>Apr 1</td>
	<td>Graphs</td>
	<td>Lab 09</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>11</td>
	<td>Apr 8</td>
	<td>Mystery Topic</td>
	<td>Lab 10</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>12</td>
	<td>Apr 15 ‡</td>
	<td>Network Events</td>
	<td>Lab 11</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>13</td>
	<td>Apr 22</td>
	<td>Threads, 🦃</td>
	<td>Lab 12</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>14</td>
	<td>May 6</td>
	<td>Wrap-Up, Review</td>
	<td>Lab 13</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>-</td>
	<td>May 13</td>
	<td>Finals Week</td>
	<td>Lab 14, Final Exam</td>
</tr>

{{< /schedule >}}

 - † No class on Wednesday, Feb 14 (Ski Day)
 - ‡ No class on Monday, Apr 8 (Eclipse Day)
 - There may be less than 14 labs.
