---
title: "CS 2381 Fall 2024: Syllabus"
date: "2024-08-01"
---

{{< lead >}}
Data Structures and Intermediate Programming
{{< /lead >}}

[&larr; Back to Course Site](../)

<blockquote>
<b>Course Catalog:</b><br>
A second programming course which reinforces the programming
constructs learned in CS 2370 and covers more advanced programming
techniques. Students learn about the client/server paradigm, how to
create graphical user interfaces and event-driven program structure,
and how to use basic data structures such as stacks, queues, lists,
and trees. Students write applications using basic networking and
multithreading techniques. Three lecture hours and 2 hours of computer
lab. Falls and Springs.
<br>Prereq: CS2370
</blockquote>

# Course Info

 - Instructor: Nat Tuck 
 - Email: \<<nathaniel.tuck@plymouth.edu>\>
 - Office: D&M 305
 - Lecture: Monday, Wednesday, Friday at 11:15am-12:05pm
 - Labs:
   - Section 01: Tuesday at 10-11:40am
   - Section 02: Tuesday at noon-1:40pm
 - Final Exam: TBA
 - Course Site: https://homework.quest/ click "cs2381"
 - Office Hours: See course site.


## Student Learning Outcomes

Successful students will: 

 - Understand how to structure data in computer programs, including
   the roles of several common data structures.
 - Be comfortable writing medium-sized programs in a modern
   programming language like Java.
 - Be able to determine the computational complexity of many
   operations and algorithms.
 - Practice reading and understanding computer code.
 - Consider creative solutions to programming problems.

## Texts

We will be using the following free online textbooks:

 - https://greenteapress.com/wp/think-data-structures/
 - https://greenteapress.com/wp/think-java-2e/


# Grading

<table class="table table-striped">
  <thead>
    <tr>
	  <td>Thing</td>
	  <td>Weight</td>
	</tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
	<tr>
	  <td>Labs</td>
	  <td>40</td>
	</tr>
    <tr>
	  <td>Homework</td>
	  <td>35</td>
	</tr>
    <tr>
	  <td>Final Exam</td>
	  <td>25</td>
	</tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

The number of points available in an assessment may (or may not)
exceed the denominator used in the grade calculation. For example, if
the final exam offers 104 points out of 100, then a perfect score
would count as 26% towards the final course grade.

**Letter grades**

&ge; 93 &rarr; A, &ge; 90 &rarr; A-, <br>
&ge; 87 &rarr; B+, &ge; 83 &rarr; B, &ge; 80 &rarr; B-, <br>
&ge; 77 &rarr; C+, &ge; 73 &rarr; C, &ge; 70 &rarr; C-, <br>
&ge; 67 &rarr; D+, &ge; 63 &rarr; D, &ge; 60 &rarr; D-, <br>
else (&lt; 60) &rarr; F

**Labs**

Each week there will be a lab assignment to complete during the lab
period. Labs will only be accepted before the end of the lab period,
and only when submitted from a lab workstation.

The purpose of this course is to teach the skill of computer
programming. Students need to practice writing programs themselves
without external help. Therefore, the following rules apply to
lab sessions:

 - Personal electronics may not be used. If they are brought to
   lab, they must be kept in a closed container like a backpack.
 - Only approved web resources can be used: Inkfish, the course site,
   provided lecture notes, the textbooks(s), the offical programming
   language documentation, and anything directly linked from the
   current lab assignment.
 - Students who intentionally or repeatedly violate this policy will
   be asked to leave and will not be able to complete that lab
   assignment.
 - These specific rules may be overridden by the instructions in
   individual lab assignments.

**Homework**

Each week there will be a homework assignment to be completed outside
of class.

Minimizing the use of external resources is recommended, and academic
honesty rules will be strictly enforced.

Homeworks submitted after the deadline loses 1% per hour late (round
up).

There may be extra assignments that are counted as homework for
administrative tasks like completing course evaluations.

**Inkfish and Script Grades**

Labs and homework will be provided through an online web application
called Inkfish and must be submitted through the same system. Emailed
work will not be accepted unless requested beforehand.

A portion of your grade for labs and homework assignments may be
generated by an automatic grading script which runs when you submit
your work. Unless there is a clear bug 🪳 in the script, the script
output is that portion of your grade and will not be adjusted
manually. You are being graded on getting the script to give you
points. You should review the output, make corrections, and resubmit
before the deadline if you are unhappy with the script results.

Script grades will be reduced if you submit work inconsistent with the
text or spirit of the assignment, such as hard-coding outputs that
should be calculated.

**Teams**

You may be assigned to work with a partner, in which case pair
programming is required. In assigning partners, sometimes there ends
up being a team of one or (under rare circumstances) three.

All team members are responsible for and get credit for any work
submitted as a team.

**Final Exam**

The final exam will be on paper. Be prepared to write both English and
code.

No electronics are allowed in exams.

Graded exams can be reviewed during office hours or by appointment.

**Grade Appeals**

If you think you recieved an incorrect grade, send me an email
describing why your grade is wrong and how you think it should be
corrected.

If the grade isn't clearly wrong, I will ask you to stop by my office
hours so we can discuss the issue in more detail.

Requests to correct grades must be sent within a week of the grade
being posted and before the start of finals week or they won't be
considered unless there is a good reason to make an exception.

**Fair Grading Policy**

All grading in this class is subject to the university [Fair Grading Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/).

**Excused Absences**

If you are unable to submit an assignment or take an exam on time due
to a circumstance covered by the university [Excused Absence Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/),
contact the professor to discuss making up the assignment. If you are
able to contact the professor before the assignment deadline or exam
date you must do so.

**Late Registration**

If you register late for the course please contact the professor to
discuss completing any missed assignments as soon as possible and
whether you need an extension on at most one additional homework.

**Course Evaluations**

Course evaluations can be a valuable tool to determine how the
semester went. They're more useful with a higher response rate,
so please complete your course evaluation survey.


# Resources

## Tutoring

There is evening tutoring in the lab classroom. See the course website
for more details. The [PASS Office](
https://www.plymouth.edu/academics/plymouth-academic-support-services)
also offers individual tutoring.

## Accomodations

Plymouth State University is committed to providing students with
documented disabilities equal access to all university programs and
facilities. If you think you have a disability requiring
accommodations, you should contact Campus Accessibility Services
(CAS), located in Speare (535-3300) to determine whether you are
eligible for such accommodations. Academic accommodations will only be
considered for students who have registered with CAS. If you have
authorized CAS to electronically deliver a Letter of Accommodations
for this course, please communicate with your instructor to review
your accommodations.

# Academic Integrity

Please carefully read and be familiar with the unversity [Academic
Integrity Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/).
Especially don't do any of the things in the list of examples of
academic integrity violations. Make sure to review the penalties for
repeated offenses.

The primary subject of this class is writing small computer programs.
In order to learn that skill, you need to practice it by completing
the programming assignments by writing code yourself (or with your
team on team assignments).

The following things are obvious cheating:

 - Submitting code that wasn't written by you (or your team).
   - Two exceptions: Starter code; small examples in the official
     documention for the programming language or library we are using.
 - Sharing your soluton code with other students (except teammates).
 - Looking at other solutions to this or similar problems.
 - Accessing unauthorized resources in a lab or exam.

Cheating will be handled as follows:

 - During an exam or lab, if you are caught cheating or acting in a
   way that appears to facilitate cheating (e.g. using unauthorized
   electronics) you will be asked to leave and will not be allowed to
   complete the assignment.
 - The default penalty for cheating on any assignment is zero grade on
   that assignment.

Partner assignment are expected to be done working together. You have
at least some responsibility for any work submitted for your team.

You may not post solutions for assignments in this class publicly. 

## Tentative Schedule

The initial plan is for homework to be due at 11:59pm on Monday.

{{< schedule >}}

<tr>
	<td>1</td>
	<td>Aug 26</td>
	<td>Intros: Class, Java, Data</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>2</td>
	<td>Sep 02 †</td>
	<td>Data Types</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>3</td>
	<td>Sep 09</td>
    <td>OOP Review, Records</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>4</td>
	<td>Sep 16</td>
	<td>Lists, Generics 🪳</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>5</td>
	<td>Sep 23</td>
	<td>Arrays, ArrayList</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>6</td>
	<td>Sep 30</td>
	<td>Stacks, Queues</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>7</td>
	<td>Oct 07</td>
	<td>Deques</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>8</td>
	<td>Oct 14</td>
	<td>Sets, Association Lists</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>9</td>
	<td>Oct 21</td>
	<td>Skip Lists</td>
    <td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>10</td>
	<td>Oct 28</td>
	<td>BSTs</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>11</td>
	<td>Nov 04</td>
	<td>Priority Queue</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>12</td>
	<td>Nov 11 †</td>
	<td>Hash Tables</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>13</td>
	<td>Nov 18</td>
	<td>Threads</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>14</td>
	<td>Nov 25 ‡</td>
	<td>🦃</th>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>15</td>
	<td>Dec 02</td>
	<td>Wrap-Up, Review</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>-</td>
	<td>Dec 09</td>
	<td>Finals Week</td>
	<td>Final Exam</td>
</tr>

{{< /schedule >}}

 - † No class on Monday, Sep 02 (Labor Day) or 
     Monday, Nov 11 (Veterans Day)
 - ‡ No class Wed, Thu, Fri (Thanksgiving)
