---
title: "Notes: 03-23 Single Source Shortest Path"
date: "2026-03-21"
---

## The Problem(s)

We have:

- A weighted, directed graph.
- Some source vertex, *s*.
- Some target vertex, *t*.

We want to find the shortest path from *s* to *t*.

**Generalization: Path Tree**

We have:

- A weighted, directed graph.
- Some source vertex, *s*.

We want to find the shortest paths from *s* to every vertex in the graph.

This will be a tree, rooted at *s*. Why?

**Problem: Negative Edges**

- Negative edges are a complication.
- If we're really solving the "shortest walk" problem, then a negative cycle
means there is no shortest path; it's always better to find the negative cycle
and loop forever.
- Even with a "shortest path" problem, negative edges mess up everything. What
if there's a heavily-negative edge on the other side of the graph and we can get
a lower path cost by going over there first?

## The Algorithm

We'll solve both versions of the problem problems the same way. If we don't need
the whole tree, we can stop when we have the shortest path from *s* to *t*.

Setup:

- An array `dist[]` gives the shortest distance found so far from *s* to each
vertex. Init to infinity.
- An array `pred[]` gives the predecessor node in that candidate shortest path.
Init this to null.

Tense edges:

- An edge (u, v) is tense if `dist[u] + weight(u, v) < dist[v]`. In that case
the path to *v* through *u* is clearly better than our current best path.
- We can relax the edge by updating our best path *v* to use that edge.

The generic algorithm:

- Find and relax tense edges until we've run out of them.

Notes:

- An edge (u, v) can only be tense if we already have a distance to u, which
means we've already got a path to u.
- So this class of algorithms will build out a path tree from the source to all
other vertices.
- We should be able to prove that relaxation will find shortest paths by
contradiction. Can we?
- We might need to assume positive edge weights.

## Specific Case: Unweighted Directed Graph

We can think of an unweighted graph as a graph with all weights = 1.

For this, we can just do breadth-first search with dist and pred arrays. Because
we're going breadth first, we'll hit vertices in distance order and we'll only
need to relax an edge to each vertex once.

## Specific Case: DAG

We've got no cycles, so we can safely write down this recurrence:

- We know `dist[v] = 0` if v = s.
- Otherwise, `dist[v] = min((for each u) dist[u] + weight(u, v))`

We can do memoization / dynamic programming to solve this efficiently.

## More generally: Dijkstra's Algorithm

This just best-first search. We use a priority queue to hit vertices in distance
order by weight.

## Most simply: Bellman-Ford

```
until we run out of tense edges:
  for each edge (u, v):
    relax((u, v))
```

Recurrance variantion for dynamic programming

```
# Shortest distance from s to v, in at most i steps:
dist(i, v):
  if i == 0 and v == s:
    return 0
  if i == 0 and v != s:
    return inf

  return min(
    dist(i-1, v),
    min((for each u) dist(i-1, u) + weight(u, v))
  )
```

## Make sure we've walked through examples of each of these on the board
