---
title: "CS 2370 Spring 2024: Syllabus"
date: "2024-01-08"
---

{{< lead >}}
Introduction to Programming
{{< /lead >}}

[&larr; Back to Course Site](../)

<blockquote>
<b>Course Catalog:</b><br>
A first course in computer programming, covering variables, functions,
conditionals, recursion, loops, and arrays. Emphasis is placed on
documentation and algorithm planning. Object-oriented programming is
introduced, including methods, classes, inheritance, and polymorphism.
Three lecture hours and 2 hours of computer lab. Springs and Falls.
<br>Prerequisite(s): CS 2010 or MT 3720
</blockquote>

# Course Info

 - Instructor: Nat Tuck 
 - Email: <nathaniel.tuck@plymouth.edu>
 - Office: D&M 305
 - Lecture: Mon, Wed, Fri at 1:25-2:15pm in D&M 442
 - Lab: Tuesday at 2:00-3:40pm in D&M 404
 - Office Hours: Wed noon-1pm, Fri 10-11am
 - Course Site: https://homework.quest/ click "cs2370"

## Student Learning Outcomes

Successful students will: 

 - Be able to write and run Python programs to solve tasks.
 - Learn to algorithmically find solutions to problems.
 - Be able to test their code to see that it's working correctly.
 - Learn basic object-oriented programming concepts.

## Texts

Students are not required to purchase a commercial textbook for this course.

Freely available textbooks:

 - [Automate the Boring Stuff with Python](https://automatetheboringstuff.com/)
 - [Think Python](https://greenteapress.com/wp/think-python-2e/)

# Grading

<table class="table table-striped">
  <thead>
    <tr>
	  <td>Thing</td>
	  <td>Weight</td>
	</tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
	<tr>
	  <td>Labs</td>
	  <td>40</td>
	</tr>
    <tr>
	  <td>Homework</td>
	  <td>35</td>
	</tr>
    <tr>
	  <td>Final Exam</td>
	  <td>25</td>
	</tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

The number of points available in an assessment may (or may not)
exceed the denominator used in the grade calculation. For example, if
the final exam offers 104 points out of 100, then a perfect score
would count as 26% towards the final course grade.

**Letter grades**

&ge; 93 &rarr; A, &ge; 90 &rarr; A-, <br>
&ge; 87 &rarr; B+, &ge; 83 &rarr; B, &ge; 80 &rarr; B-, <br>
&ge; 77 &rarr; C+, &ge; 73 &rarr; C, &ge; 70 &rarr; C-, <br>
&ge; 67 &rarr; D+, &ge; 63 &rarr; D, &ge; 60 &rarr; D-, <br>
else (&lt; 60) &rarr; F

**Labs**

Each week there will be a lab assignment to complete during the lab
period. Labs will only be accepted before the end of the lab period,
and only when submitted from a lab workstation.

The purpose of this course is to teach the skill of computer
programming. Students need to practice writing programs themselves
without external help. Therefore, the following rules apply to
lab sessions:

 - Personal electronics may not be used. If they are brought to
   lab, they must be kept in a closed container like a backpack.
 - Only approved web resources can be used: Inkfish, the course site,
   provided lecture notes, the textbooks(s), the offical programming
   language documentation, and anything directly linked from the
   current lab assignment.
 - Students who intentionally or repeatedly violate this policy will
   be asked to leave and will not be able to complete that lab
   assignment.
 - These specific rules may be overridden by the instructions in
   individual lab assignments.

**Homework**

Each week there will be a homework assignment to be completed outside
of class.

Minimizing the use of external resources is recommended, and academic
honesty rules will be strictly enforced.

Homeworks submitted after the deadline loses 1% per hour late.

**Inkfish and Script Grades**

Labs and homework will be provided through an online web application
called Inkfish and must be submitted through the same system. Emailed
work will not be accepted unless requested beforehand.

A portion of your grade for labs and homework assignments may be
generated by an automatic grading script which runs when you submit
your work. Unless there is a clear bug 🪳 in the script, the script
output is that portion of your grade and will not be adjusted
manually. You are being graded on getting the script to give you
points. You should review the output, make corrections, and resubmit
before the deadline if you are unhappy with the script results.

Script grades will be reduced if you submit work inconsistent with the
text or spirit of the assignment, such as hard-coding outputs that
should be calculated.

**Teams**

You may be assigned to work with a partner, in which case pair
programming is required. In assigning partners, sometimes there ends
up being a team of one or (under rare circumstances) three.

All team members are responsible for and get credit for any work
submitted as a team.

**Final Exam**

The final exam will be on paper. Be prepared to write both English and
code.

No electronics are allowed in exams.

Graded exams can be reviewed during office hours or by appointment.

**Grade Appeals**

If you think you recieved an incorrect grade, send me an email
describing why your grade is wrong and how you think it should be
corrected.

If the grade isn't clearly wrong, I will ask you to stop by my office
hours so we can discuss the issue in more detail.

**Fair Grading Policy**

All grading in this class is subject to the university [Fair Grading Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/).

**Excused Absences**

If you are unable to submit an assignment or take an exam on time due
to a circumstance covered by the university [Excused Absence Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/),
contact the professor to discuss making up the assignment. If you are
able to contact the professor before the assignment deadline or exam
date you must do so.

**Late Registration**

If you register late for the course please contact the professor to
discuss completing any missed assignments as soon as possible.

**Course Evaluations**

Course evaluations can be a valuable tool to determine how the
semester went. They're more useful with a higher response rate.

To encourage more responses, any student who completes their course
evaluation before the start of finals week will get a 5% bonus to
their final exam grade.


# Resources

## Tutoring

There is evening tutoring in the lab classroom. See the course website
for more details. The [PASS Office](
https://www.plymouth.edu/academics/plymouth-academic-support-services)
also offers individual tutoring.

## Accomodations

Plymouth State University is committed to providing students with
documented disabilities equal access to all university programs and
facilities. If you think you have a disability requiring
accommodations, you should contact Campus Accessibility Services
(CAS), located in Speare (535-3300) to determine whether you are
eligible for such accommodations. Academic accommodations will only be
considered for students who have registered with CAS. If you have
authorized CAS to electronically deliver a Letter of Accommodations
for this course, please communicate with your instructor to review
your accommodations.

# Academic Integrity

Please carefully read and be familiar with the unversity [Academic
Integrity Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/).
Especially don't do any of the things in the list of examples of
academic integrity violations. Make sure to review the penalties for
repeated offenses.

The primary subject of this class is writing small computer programs.
In order to learn that skill, you need to practice it by completing
the programming assignments by writing code yourself (or with your
team on team assignments).

The following things are obvious cheating:

 - Submitting code that wasn't written by you (or your team).
   - Two exceptions: Starter code supplied with the assignment, small
     examples in the lecture notes, textbook, or official documention.
 - Sharing your soluton code with other students (except teammates).
 - Looking at other solutions to this or similar problems.
 - Accessing unauthorized resources in a lab or exam.

Cheating will be handled as follows:

 - During an exam or lab, if you are caught cheating or acting in a
   way that appears to facilitate cheating (e.g. using unauthorized
   electronics) you will be asked to leave and will not be allowed to
   complete the assignment. In lab, you may get a warning first.
 - The default penalty for cheating on any assignment is zero grade on
   that assignment.

Partner assignment are expected to be done working together. You have
at least some responsibility for any work submitted for your team.

You may not post solutions for assignments in this class publicly. 


## Tentative Schedule

The initial plan is for homework to be due at 11:59pm on Thursday.

{{< schedule >}}

<tr>
	<td>1</td>
	<td>Jan 22</td>
	<td>Intros: Class, Code, Data</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>2</td>
	<td>Jan 29</td>
	<td>Scripts, Interactive I/O</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>3</td>
	<td>Feb 5</td>
	<td>Simple Data, Functions</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>4</td>
	<td>Feb 12 †</td>
	<td>Files, Lists</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>5</td>
	<td>Feb 19</td>
	<td>String Manipulation</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>6</td>
	<td>Feb 26</td>
	<td>Dictionaries</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>7</td>
	<td>Mar 4</td>
	<td>Directory Trees, Recursion</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>-</td>
	<td>Mar 11</td>
	<td colspan="2" style="text-align: center">---- Spring Break ----</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>8</td>
	<td>Mar 18</td>
	<td>Classes and Methods</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>9</td>
	<td>Mar 25</td>
	<td>Inheritence and Ducks</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>10</td>
	<td>Apr 1</td>
	<td>Web Scraping</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>11</td>
	<td>Apr 8</td>
	<td>HTML Traversals</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>12</td>
	<td>Apr 15 ‡</td>
	<td>Web App Server</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>13</td>
	<td>Apr 22</td>
	<td>Bonus Topic</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>14</td>
	<td>May 6</td>
	<td>Wrap-Up, Review</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>-</td>
	<td>May 13</td>
	<td>Finals Week</td>
	<td>Final Exam</td>
</tr>

{{< /schedule >}}

 - † No class on Wednesday, Feb 14 (Ski Day)
 - ‡ No class on Monday, Apr 8 (Eclipse Day)
