---
title: "CS 2470 Spring 2026: Syllabus"
date: "2026-01-17"
---

{{< lead >}}
Systems Programming in C/C++
{{< /lead >}}

[&larr; Back to Course Site](../)

<blockquote>
<b>Course Catalog:</b><br>
Gives students who are already proficient programmers experience in
systems-level programming in C/C++. In particular, students learn how
to create C/C++ programs that interact with the hardware and other
software on a machine. Springs.
<br>Prerequisite(s): CS CS2370
</blockquote>

## Course Info

- Credits: 2
- Instructor: Nat Tuck
- Email: <nathaniel.tuck@plymouth.edu>
- Office: D&M 305
- Lecture: Wed, Fri at 10:10-11:00am in D&M 404
- Office Hours: M 11:10am-12:10pm, W 1:30-2:30pm, Th 10:30-11:30am, F 1:30-2:30pm
- Final Exam Period: [Fri May 8th @ 8:00-10:30am](
https://www.plymouth.edu/sites/default/files/media/2025-11/Spring%202026%20Final%20Exam%20Schedule.pdf)
- Course Site: <https://homework.quest/>

### Student Learning Outcomes

Successful students will:

- Be able to write and run low level computer programs to accomplish
   system-level tasks.
- Be comfortable with the C programming language.
- Be familiar with basic concepts in Unix-style systems programming

### Texts

Students are not required to purchase a commercial textbook for this course.

Recommended text:

- The C Programming Language, 2nd Edition, by Kernighan and Ritchie

Freely available textbooks:

- [The Linux Command Line](https://linuxcommand.org/tlcl.php)
- [Beej's Guide to C](https://beej.us/guide/bgc/)
- [OSTEP](https://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~remzi/OSTEP/)
- [Pointers Tutorial](https://github.com/jflaherty/ptrtut13)
- [LazyVim for Ambitious Developers](https://lazyvim-ambitious-devs.phillips.codes/)

## Grading

<table class="table table-striped">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <td>Thing</td>
      <td>Weight</td>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>Homework</td>
      <td>40</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Labs</td>
      <td>40</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>Project</td>
      <td>20</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

The number of points available in an assessment may (or may not)
exceed the denominator used in the grade calculation. For example, if
the final exam offers 104 points out of 100, then a perfect score
would count as 26% towards the final course grade.

**Letter grades**

&ge; 93 &rarr; A, &ge; 90 &rarr; A-, <br>
&ge; 87 &rarr; B+, &ge; 83 &rarr; B, &ge; 80 &rarr; B-, <br>
&ge; 77 &rarr; C+, &ge; 73 &rarr; C, &ge; 70 &rarr; C-, <br>
&ge; 67 &rarr; D+, &ge; 63 &rarr; D, &ge; 60 &rarr; D-, <br>
else (&lt; 60) &rarr; F

**Attendance**

Attendance is required for all class meetings. You must check in to the online
attendance tool within 5 minutes of the start of the period to receive credit
for attendance. If you miss more than four meetings then each subsequent
unexcused absence will reduce your final grade by 4 percentage points.

No makeups for unexcused lab absences. Any class meeting might be
a lab.

**Homework**

Approximately each week there will be a homework assignment to be
completed outside of class.

Minimizing the use of external resources is recommended, and academic
honesty rules will be strictly enforced.

Homework will be posted on Inkfish. Check Inkfish regularly for
upcoming due dates.

Homeworks submitted after the deadline loses 1% per hour late (round
up) to a maximum penalty of 100%.

**Labs**

Approximately every other week there will be a lab assignment to
complete during the class period. Labs will only be accepted before
the end of the lab period, and only when submitted from a lab
workstation.

The purpose of this course is to teach the skill of computer
programming. Students need to practice writing programs themselves
without external help. Therefore, the following rules apply to
lab assignments:

- Personal electronics may not be used. If they are brought to
   lab, they must be kept in a closed container like a backpack.
- Only approved web resources can be used: Inkfish, the course site,
   provided lecture notes, the textbooks(s), the official programming
   language documentation, and anything directly linked from the
   current lab assignment.
- That means no Google and definitely no LLM Chatbots during labs.
- Students who intentionally or repeatedly violate this policy will
   be asked to leave and will not be able to complete that lab
   assignment.
- These specific rules may be overridden by the instructions in
   individual lab assignments.

During the final exam period we will do one final lab.

**Inkfish and Script Grades**

Labs and homework will be provided through an online web application
called Inkfish and must be submitted through the same system. Any
solutions for lab or homework assignment sent by email will not be
accepted and will incur a 5% grade penalty on the associated
assignment unless the code is sent as a direct reply to an email
requesting it.

A portion of your grade for labs and homework assignments may be
generated by an automatic grading script which runs when you submit
your work. Unless there is a clear bug 🪳 in the script, the script
output is that portion of your grade and will not be adjusted
manually. You are being graded on getting the script to give you
points. You should review the output, make corrections, and resubmit
before the deadline if you are unhappy with the script results.

Script grades will be reduced if you submit work inconsistent with the
text or spirit of the assignment, such as hard-coding outputs that
should be calculated.

**Teams**

You may be assigned to work with a partner. In such cases, pair
programming is required. In assigning partners, sometimes there ends
up being a team of one or (under rare circumstances) three.

All team members are responsible for and get credit for any work
submitted as a team. Keep in mind that pair programming means you
should not be doing work for team assignments on your own.

**Project**

At the end of the semester there will be a programming project.

This is like a homework, but it's larger, more difficult, and worth
more points.

**Grade Appeals**

If you think you received an incorrect grade, send me an email
describing why your grade is wrong and how you think it should be
corrected.

If the grade isn't clearly wrong, I will ask you to stop by my office
hours so we can discuss the issue in more detail.

Any grade concerns must be raised within two weeks of the grade being
posted.

**Fair Grading Policy**

All grading in this class is subject to the university [Fair Grading Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/).

**Excused Absences**

Absences will be excused and make-up work allowed only for absences
covered by the university [Excused Absence Policy](
https://campus.plymouth.edu/faculty-governance/wp-content/uploads/sites/20/2017/05/PSU-Excused-Absence-Policy.pdf).

If you know you will be missing a class meeting in advance you must
contact the professor before the meeting. For unforeseen an unavoidable
absences, please contact the professor as soon as reasonably possible.

**Late Registration**

If you register late for the course please contact the professor to
discuss completing any missed assignments as soon as possible.

**Course Evaluations**

Course evaluations can be a valuable tool to determine how the
semester went. They're more useful with a higher response rate. You
should do your course evaluations.

**Class Announcements**

Class announcements will be posted on Canvas and/or sent to your
university email address. Make sure to check both regularly.

## Resources

### Tutoring

There should be evening tutoring offered by the college. See the course website
for more details. The [PASS Office](
https://www.plymouth.edu/academics/plymouth-academic-support-services)
also offers individual tutoring.

### Accommodations

Plymouth State University is committed to providing students with documented
disabilities equal access to all university programs and facilities. If you
think you have a disability requiring accommodations, you should contact Campus
Accessibility Services (CAS), located in Speare (603-535-3300) to determine
whether you are eligible for such accommodations. Academic accommodations will
only be considered for students who have registered with CAS. If you have
authorized CAS to electronically deliver a Letter of Accommodations for this
course, please communicate with your instructor to review your accommodations.

## Academic Integrity

Please carefully read and be familiar with the university [Academic
Integrity Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/).
Especially don't do any of the things in the list of examples of
academic integrity violations. Make sure to review the penalties for
repeated offenses.

The primary subject of this class is writing small computer programs.
In order to learn that skill, you need to practice it by completing
the programming assignments by writing code yourself (or with your
team on team assignments).

Do not:

- Submit code that was written for an assignment in this class by someone
who is not on your team.
- Share solution code for any assignment in this class with anyone who
is not on your team.
- Post solutions for assignments in this class publicly.
- Access unauthorized resources in a lab or exam.
- Search the web for solutions to assignments in this class or similar classes.

Do:

- Use starter code and small snippets from official documentation as a starting
point for your solutions.
- (On homework, not in labs) Ask LLM chatbots questions to clarify concepts and
give short code samples to illustrate specifics.

Cheating will be handled as follows:

- During an exam or lab, if you are caught cheating or acting in a
   way that appears to facilitate cheating (e.g. using unauthorized
   electronics) you will be asked to leave and will not be allowed to
   complete the assignment. In lab, you may get a warning first.
- The default penalty for cheating on any assignment is zero grade on
   that assignment.

Partner assignment are expected to be done working together. If your
partner cheated on an assignment and submitted it without you seeing,
you still get a zero on that assignment.

## Tentative Schedule

The initial plan is to have homework due at end-of-day Tuesday.

{{< schedule >}}

<tr>
 <td>1</td>
 <td>Jan 19 †</td>
 <td>Introduction, Shell</td>
 <td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>2</td>
 <td>Jan 26</td>
 <td>C and Assembly</td>
 <td>HW 01, Lab 01</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>3</td>
 <td>Feb 2</td>
 <td>C Language Intro</td>
 <td>HW 02</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>4</td>
 <td>Feb 9 ‡</td>
 <td>The Stack and Strings</td>
 <td>HW 03, Lab 02</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>5</td>
 <td>Feb 16</td>
 <td>malloc() and free()</td>
 <td>HW 04</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>6</td>
 <td>Feb 23</td>
 <td>The Heap, Address Space</td>
 <td>HW 05, Lab 03</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>7</td>
 <td>Mar 2</td>
 <td>File I/O</td>
 <td>HW 06</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>8</td>
 <td>Mar 9</td>
 <td>Command parsing</td>
 <td>HW 07, Lab 04</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>--</td>
 <td>Mar 16</td>
 <td colspan="2" style="text-align: center">---- Spring Break ----</td>
 <td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>9</td>
 <td>Mar 23</td>
 <td>System Call I/O</td>
 <td>HW 08</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>10</td>
 <td>Mar 30</td>
 <td>Processes and fork()</td>
 <td>HW 09, Lab 05</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>11</td>
 <td>Apr 6</td>
 <td>Network Client</td>
 <td>HW 10, Lab 06</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>12</td>
 <td>Apr 13</td>
 <td>A bit about C++</td>
 <td>HW 11</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>13</td>
 <td>Apr 20</td>
 <td>Redirects and Pipes</td>
 <td>HW 12</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>14</td>
 <td>Apr 27</td>
 <td>Wrap-up, Review</td>
 <td>Redo a HW and Lab</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>-</td>
 <td>May 4</td>
 <td>Finals Week</td>
 <td>Final Project, Final Lab</td>
</tr>

{{< /schedule >}}

- † No class on Monday, Jan 19 (MLK Day)
- ‡ Ski Day on Wednesday, Feb 11 (no day classes; graduate evening classes will be held)
