---
title: "CS 2370 Spring 2025: Syllabus"
date: "2025-01-17"
---

{{< lead >}}
Intro to Programming
{{< /lead >}}

[&larr; Back to Course Site](../)

<blockquote>
<b>Course Catalog:</b><br>
A first course in computer programming, covering variables, functions,
conditionals, recursion, loops, and arrays. Emphasis is placed on
documentation and algorithm planning. Object-oriented programming is
introduced, including methods, classes, inheritance, and polymorphism.
Three lecture hours and 2 hours of computer lab. Springs and Falls.
<br/>Prerequisite(s): CS 2010 or MT 3720 
</blockquote>

# Course Info

 - Credits: 4
 - Instructor: Nat Tuck 
 - Email: <nathaniel.tuck@plymouth.edu>
 - Office: D&M 305
 - Lecture: Mon, Wed, Fri at 1:25-2:15pm in D&M 404
 - Lab: Thursday at 12:00-1:40pm in D&M 404
 - Office Hours: See https://homework.quest/
 - Final Exam: [Wed May 7th @ 2:00-4:30pm](
 https://www.plymouth.edu/sites/default/files/media/2024-12/spring-2025-final-exam-schedule.pdf
 )

## Student Learning Outcomes

Successful students will: 

 - Be able to write and run computer programs to accomplish tasks.
 - Learn to algorithmically find solutions to problems.
 - Be able to test their code to see that it’s working correctly.

## Texts

Students are not required to purchase a commercial textbook for this course.

Freely available textbooks:

 - [Think Python](https://greenteapress.com/wp/think-python-2e/)
 - [Automate the Boring Stuff with Python](https://automatetheboringstuff.com/)

# Grading

<table class="table table-striped">
  <thead>
    <tr>
	  <td>Thing</td>
	  <td>Weight</td>
	</tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
	<tr>
	  <td>Labs</td>
	  <td>30</td>
	</tr>
    <tr>
	  <td>Homework</td>
	  <td>30</td>
	</tr>
    <tr>
	  <td>Final Exam</td>
	  <td>25</td>
	</tr>
    <tr>
	  <td>Quizzes</td>
	  <td>15</td>
	</tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

The number of points available in an assessment may (or may not)
exceed the denominator used in the grade calculation. For example, if
the final exam offers 104 points out of 100, then a perfect score
would count as 26% towards the final course grade.

**Letter grades**

&ge; 93 &rarr; A, &ge; 90 &rarr; A-, <br>
&ge; 87 &rarr; B+, &ge; 83 &rarr; B, &ge; 80 &rarr; B-, <br>
&ge; 77 &rarr; C+, &ge; 73 &rarr; C, &ge; 70 &rarr; C-, <br>
&ge; 67 &rarr; D+, &ge; 63 &rarr; D, &ge; 60 &rarr; D-, <br>
else (&lt; 60) &rarr; F

**Labs**

Approximately each week there will be a lab assignment to complete
during the lab period. Labs will only be accepted before the end of
the lab period, and only when submitted from a lab workstation.

The purpose of this course is to teach the skill of computer
programming. Students need to practice writing programs themselves
without external help. Therefore, the following rules apply to
lab sessions:

 - Personal electronics may not be used. If they are brought to
   lab, they must be kept in a closed container like a backpack.
 - Only approved web resources can be used: Inkfish, the course site,
   provided lecture notes, the textbooks(s), the offical programming
   language documentation, and anything directly linked from the
   current lab assignment.
 - Students who intentionally or repeatedly violate this policy will
   be asked to leave and will not be able to complete that lab
   assignment.
 - These specific rules may be overridden by the instructions in
   individual lab assignments.

**Homework**

Approximately each week there will be a homework assignment to be
completed outside of class.

Minimizing the use of external resources is recommended, and academic
honesty rules will be strictly enforced.

Homework will be posted on Inkfish. Check Inkfish regularly for
upcoming due dates.

Homeworks submitted after the deadline loses 1% per hour late (round
up).

**Inkfish and Script Grades**

Labs and homework will be provided through an online web application
called Inkfish and must be submitted through the same system. Any
solutions for lab or homework assignment sent by email will not be
accepted and will incur a 5% grade penalty on the associated
assignment unless the code is sent as a direct reply to an email
requesting it.

A portion of your grade for labs and homework assignments may be
generated by an automatic grading script which runs when you submit
your work. Unless there is a clear bug 🪳 in the script, the script
output is that portion of your grade and will not be adjusted
manually. You are being graded on getting the script to give you
points. You should review the output, make corrections, and resubmit
before the deadline if you are unhappy with the script results.

Script grades will be reduced if you submit work inconsistent with the
text or spirit of the assignment, such as hard-coding outputs that
should be calculated.

**Teams**

You may be assigned to work with a partner. In such cases, pair
programming is required. In assigning partners, sometimes there ends
up being a team of one or (under rare circumstances) three.

All team members are responsible for and get credit for any work
submitted as a team. Keep in mind that pair programming means you
should not be doing work for team assignments on your own.

**Quizzes**

There will be several quizzes throughout the semester. These may occur
during class time or they may be due outside of class.

In class quizzes must be completed with no notes or other resources.

Out of class quizzes should be done referring only to your notes,
lecture notes, and readings from previous homework assignments.

At the end of the semester the lowest quiz will be dropped.

**Final Exam**

The final exam will most likely be on paper. Be prepared to write both
English and code.

No electronics are allowed in exams.

Graded exams can be reviewed during office hours or by appointment.

**Grade Appeals**

If you think you recieved an incorrect grade, send me an email
describing why your grade is wrong and how you think it should be
corrected.

If the grade isn't clearly wrong, I will ask you to stop by my office
hours so we can discuss the issue in more detail.

Any grade concerns must be raised within two weeks of the grade being
posted.

**Fair Grading Policy**

All grading in this class is subject to the university [Fair Grading Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/).

**Excused Absences**

If you are unable to submit an assignment or take an exam on time due
to circumstances that were unforseen and reasonably unavoidable
contact the professor to discuss making up the assignment. If you know
you will miss something and are reasonable able to contact the
professor to discuss alternatives beforehand you must do so.
See the
[Excused Absence Policy](https://campus.plymouth.edu/faculty-governance/wp-content/uploads/sites/20/2017/05/PSU-Excused-Absence-Policy.pdf)
for further details.


**Late Registration**

If you register late for the course please contact the professor to
discuss completing any missed assignments as soon as possible.

**Course Evaluations**

Course evaluations can be a valuable tool to determine how the
semester went. They're more useful with a higher response rate. You
should do your course evaluations.

**Class Annoucements**

Class annoucements will be posted on Canvas and/or sent to your
university email address. Make sure to check both regularly.

# Resources

## Tutoring

There is evening tutoring in the lab classroom. See the course website
for more details. The [PASS Office](
https://www.plymouth.edu/academics/plymouth-academic-support-services)
also offers individual tutoring.

## Accomodations

Plymouth State University is committed to providing students with
documented disabilities equal access to all university programs and
facilities. If you think you have a disability requiring
accommodations, you should contact Campus Accessibility Services
(CAS), located in Speare (535-3300) to determine whether you are
eligible for such accommodations. Academic accommodations will only be
considered for students who have registered with CAS. If you have
authorized CAS to electronically deliver a Letter of Accommodations
for this course, please communicate with your instructor to review
your accommodations.

# Academic Integrity

Please carefully read and be familiar with the unversity [Academic
Integrity Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/).
Especially don't do any of the things in the list of examples of
academic integrity violations. Make sure to review the penalties for
repeated offenses.

The primary subject of this class is writing small computer programs.
In order to learn that skill, you need to practice it by completing
the programming assignments by writing code yourself (or with your
team on team assignments).

The following things are obvious cheating:

 - Submitting code that wasn't written by you (or your team).
   - Two exceptions: Starter code supplied with the assignment; small
     examples in the lecture notes, textbook, or official documention.
 - Sharing your soluton code with other students (except teammates).
 - Looking at other solutions to this or similar problems.
 - Accessing unauthorized resources in a lab or exam.

Cheating will be handled as follows:

 - During an exam or lab, if you are caught cheating or acting in a
   way that appears to facilitate cheating (e.g. using unauthorized
   electronics) you will be asked to leave and will not be allowed to
   complete the assignment. In lab, you may get a warning first.
 - The default penalty for cheating on any assignment is zero grade on
   that assignment.

Partner assignment are expected to be done working together. You have
at least some responsibility for any work submitted for your team.

You may not post solutions for assignments in this class publicly. 


## Tentative Schedule

{{< schedule >}}

<tr>
	<td>1</td>
	<td>Jan 20 †</td>
	<td>Introduction</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>2</td>
	<td>Jan 27</d>
	<td>Working with simple data</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>3</td>
	<td>Feb 3</td>
	<td>Working with structures</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>4</td>
	<td>Feb 10 ‡</td>
	<td>Working with lists</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>5</td>
	<td>Feb 17</td>
	<td>Iteration and recursion</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>6</td>
	<td>Feb 24</td>
	<td>File I/O</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>7</td>
	<td>Mar 3</td>
	<td>Directories and trees</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>8</td>
	<td>Mar 10</td>
	<td>Review; Bonus topic</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>--</td>
	<td>Mar 17</td>
	<td colspan="2" style="text-align: center">---- Spring Break ----</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>9</td>
	<td>Mar 24</td>
	<td>Working with Sets</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>10</td>
	<td>Mar 31</td>
	<td>Working with Dictionaries</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>11</td>
	<td>Apr 7</td>
	<td>Classes and Methods</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>12</td>
	<td>Apr 14</td>
    <td>Inheritence and Ducks</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>13</td>
	<td>Apr 21</td>
	<td>Attack of Boolean Algebra</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>14</td>
	<td>Apr 28</td>
	<td>Wrap-up, Review</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>-</td>
	<td>May 5</td>
	<td>Finals Week</td>
	<td>Final Exam</td>
</tr>

{{< /schedule >}}

 - † No class on Monday, Jan 20 (MLK Day)
 - ‡ No class on Wednesday, Feb 12 (Ski Day)
