---
title: "CS 4310 Spring 2026: Syllabus"
date: "2026-01-17"
---

{{< lead >}}
Operating Systems
{{< /lead >}}

[&larr; Back to Course Site](../)

<blockquote>
<b>Course Catalog:</b><br>
Covers the major concept areas of operating systems for both large and
small computers and the interrelationship between the operating system
and computer architecture. Topics include: history, tasking, process
synchronization, scheduling, memory organization, device management,
file systems, security issues, distributed and real-time systems. One
or more projects form a significant part of this course. Springs.
<br>Prerequisite(s): CS 2381 and CS 4250
</blockquote>

# Course Info

- Credits: 3
- Instructor: Nat Tuck
- Email: <nathaniel.tuck@plymouth.edu>
- Office: D&M 305
- Lecture: Mon, Wed, Fri at 9:05-9:55am in D&M 442
- Office Hours: M 11:10am-12:10pm, W 1:30-2:30pm, Th 10:30-11:30am, F 1:30-2:30pm
- Final Exam: [Wed May 6th @ 8:00-10:30am](
https://www.plymouth.edu/sites/default/files/media/2025-11/Spring%202026%20Final%20Exam%20Schedule.pdf)
- Course Site: <https://homework.quest/>

## Student Learning Outcomes

Successful students will:

- Be familiar with the implementation details of several components
of a UNIX-style operating system.
- Be able to write code to make system calls from user code.
- Understand the process by which a system call is handled in kernel code.
- Be able to write code that will run on a multi-core system.

## Texts

Students are not required to purchase a commercial textbook for this course.

Freely available textbooks:

- [OSTEP](https://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~remzi/OSTEP/)
- [xv6 book](https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.828/2025/xv6/book-riscv-rev5.pdf)
- [Beej's Guide to C](https://beej.us/guide/bgc/)

# Grading

<table class="table table-striped">
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <td>Thing</td>
   <td>Weight</td>
  </tr>
 </thead>
 <tbody>
  <tr>
   <td>Homework</td>
   <td>75</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>Final Exam</td>
   <td>25</td>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>

The number of points available in an assessment may (or may not)
exceed the denominator used in the grade calculation. For example, if
the final exam offers 104 points out of 100, then a perfect score
would count as 26% towards the final course grade.

**Letter grades**

&ge; 93 &rarr; A, &ge; 90 &rarr; A-, <br>
&ge; 87 &rarr; B+, &ge; 83 &rarr; B, &ge; 80 &rarr; B-, <br>
&ge; 77 &rarr; C+, &ge; 73 &rarr; C, &ge; 70 &rarr; C-, <br>
&ge; 67 &rarr; D+, &ge; 63 &rarr; D, &ge; 60 &rarr; D-, <br>
else (&lt; 60) &rarr; F

**Attendance**

Attendance is required for all class meetings. You must check in to the online
attendance tool within 5 minutes of the start of the period to receive credit
for attendance. If you miss more than six meetings then each subsequent
unexcused absence will reduce your final grade by 4 percentage points.

There are no makeups for unexcused exam or in-class activity absences.

**Homework**

Approximately each week there will be a homework assignment to be completed
outside of class. There may also be in-class activities graded as homework.

Minimizing the use of external resources is recommended, and academic
honesty rules will be strictly enforced.

Homework assignments will be posted on Inkfish. Check Inkfish
regularly for upcoming due dates.

Homeworks submitted after the deadline loses 1% per hour late (round
up).

Some homeworks are challenge assignments. Those are more difficult, will take
more time, and are worth more points.

**Final Exam**

We'll do an exam during the exam period. Probably on paper.

No electronics. Paper notes allowed.

**Inkfish and Script Grades**

Labs and homework will be provided through an online web application
called Inkfish and must be submitted through the same system. Any
solutions for lab or homework assignment sent by email will not be
accepted and will incur a 5% grade penalty on the associated
assignment unless the code is sent as a direct reply to an email
requesting it.

A portion of your grade for labs and homework assignments may be
generated by an automatic grading script which runs when you submit
your work. Unless there is a clear bug 🪳 in the script, the script
output is that portion of your grade and will not be adjusted
manually. You are being graded on getting the script to give you
points. You should review the output, make corrections, and resubmit
before the deadline if you are unhappy with the script results.

Script grades will be reduced if you submit work inconsistent with the
text or spirit of the assignment, such as hard-coding outputs that
should be calculated.

**Teams**

You may be assigned to work with a partner. In such cases, pair
programming is required. In assigning partners, sometimes there ends
up being a team of one or (under rare circumstances) three.

All team members are responsible for and get credit for any work
submitted as a team. Keep in mind that pair programming means you
should not be doing work for team assignments on your own.

**Grade Appeals**

If you think you received an incorrect grade, send me an email
describing why your grade is wrong and how you think it should be
corrected.

If the grade isn't clearly wrong, I will ask you to stop by my office
hours so we can discuss the issue in more detail.

Any grade concerns must be raised within two weeks of the grade being
posted.

**Fair Grading Policy**

All grading in this class is subject to the university [Fair Grading Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/).

**Excused Absences**

If you are unable to submit an assignment or take an exam on time due
to circumstances that were unforeseen and reasonably unavoidable
contact the professor to discuss making up the assignment. If you know
you will miss something and are reasonable able to contact the
professor to discuss alternatives beforehand you must do so.
See the
[Excused Absence Policy](https://campus.plymouth.edu/faculty-governance/wp-content/uploads/sites/20/2017/05/PSU-Excused-Absence-Policy.pdf)
for further details.

**Late Registration**

If you register late for the course please contact the professor to
discuss completing any missed assignments as soon as possible.

**Course Evaluations**

Course evaluations can be a valuable tool to determine how the
semester went. They're more useful with a higher response rate. You
should do your course evaluations.

**Class Announcements**

Class announcements will be posted on Canvas and/or sent to your
university email address. Make sure to check both regularly.

# Resources

## Tutoring

There is evening tutoring in the lab classroom. See the course website
for more details. The [PASS Office](
https://www.plymouth.edu/academics/plymouth-academic-support-services)
also offers individual tutoring.

## Accommodations

Plymouth State University is committed to providing students with
documented disabilities equal access to all university programs and
facilities. If you think you have a disability requiring
accommodations, you should contact Campus Accessibility Services
(CAS), located in Speare (603-535-3300) to determine whether you are
eligible for such accommodations. Academic accommodations will only be
considered for students who have registered with CAS. If you have
authorized CAS to electronically deliver a Letter of Accommodations
for this course, please communicate with your instructor to review
your accommodations.

# Academic Integrity

Please carefully read and be familiar with the university [Academic
Integrity Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/).
Especially don't do any of the things in the list of examples of
academic integrity violations. Make sure to review the penalties for
repeated offenses.

One of our goals in this class is to practice the skills of low-level
programming. Towards that end, you should be writing the majority of the code
yourself and thinking about how to build individual functions and lines of code.

Do not:

- Submit code that was written for an assignment in this class by someone
who is not on your team.
- Share solution code for any assignment in this class with anyone who
is not on your team.
- Post solutions for assignments in this class publicly, unless the assignment
specifically allows it.
- Access unauthorized resources in a lab or exam.
- Search the web for solutions to assignments in this class or similar classes.

Do:

- Use starter code and small snippets from official documentation as a starting
point for your solutions.
- (On homework, not in labs) Ask LLM chatbots questions to clarify concepts and
give short code samples to illustrate specifics.
- Use LLM coding tools when explicitly allowed by a homework assignment.

Cheating will be handled as follows:

- During an exam or lab, if you are caught cheating or acting in a
way that appears to facilitate cheating (e.g. using unauthorized
electronics) you will be asked to leave and will not be allowed to
complete the assignment. In lab, you may get a warning first.
- The default penalty for cheating on any assignment is zero grade on
that assignment.

Partner assignment are expected to be done working together. If your
partner cheated on an assignment and submitted it without you seeing,
you still get a zero on that assignment.

## Tentative Schedule

{{< schedule >}}

<tr>
 <td>1</td>
 <td>Jan 19 †</td>
 <td>Introduction</td>
 <td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>2</td>
 <td>Jan 26</td>
 <td>Assembly Review</td>
 <td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>3</td>
 <td>Feb 2</td>
 <td>System Calls</td>
 <td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>4</td>
 <td>Feb 9 ‡</td>
 <td>Virtual Memory</td>
 <td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>5</td>
 <td>Feb 16</td>
 <td>mmap(2)</td>
 <td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>6</td>
 <td>Feb 23</td>
 <td>Simple Malloc</td>
 <td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>7</td>
 <td>Mar 2</td>
 <td>Forks and threads</td>
 <td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>8</td>
 <td>Mar 9</td>
 <td>Synchronization</td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>--</td>
 <td>Mar 16</td>
 <td colspan="2" style="text-align: center">---- Spring Break ----</td>
 <td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>9</td>
 <td>Mar 23</td>
 <td>Advanced malloc</td>
 <td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>10</td>
 <td>Mar 30</td>
 <td>OS Kernel</td>
 <td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>11</td>
 <td>Apr 6</td>
 <td>Implementing a System Call</td>
 <td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>12</td>
 <td>Apr 13</td>
 <td>Disks and File Systems</td>
 <td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>13</td>
 <td>Apr 20</td>
 <td>More about File Systems</td>
 <td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>14</td>
 <td>Apr 27</td>
 <td>Semester Review</td>
 <td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
 <td>-</td>
 <td>May 4</td>
 <td>Finals Week</td>
 <td></td>
</tr>

{{< /schedule >}}

- † No class on Monday, Jan 19 (MLK Day)
- ‡ Ski Day on Wednesday, Feb 11 (no day classes; graduate evening classes will be held)
