---
title: "CS 2381 Fall 2023: Syllabus"
date: "2023-08-27"
---

{{< lead >}}
Data Structures and Intermediate Programming
{{< /lead >}}

[&larr; Back to Course Site](../)

<blockquote>
<b>Course Catalog:</b><br>
A second programming course which reinforces the programming
constructs learned in CS 2370 and covers more advanced programming
techniques. Students learn about the client/server paradigm, how to
create graphical user interfaces and event-driven program structure,
and how to use basic data structures such as stacks, queues, lists,
and trees. Students write applications using basic networking and
multithreading techniques. Three lecture hours and 2 hours of computer
lab. Falls and Springs.
<br>Prereq: CS2370
</blockquote>

# Course Info

 - Instructor: Nat Tuck 
   - Email: <nathaniel.tuck@plymouth.edu>
   - Office: D&M 305
 - Semester: Fall 2023 (Aug 28 - Dec 15)
 - Lecture: Mon, Wed, Fri at 11:15am-12:05pm in D&M 442
 - Lab in D&M 404
   - Section 01: 10am-11:40am
   - Section 02: noon-1:40pm
 - Final Exam: Mon Dec 11th, 11am-1:30pm in D&M 442
 - Office Hours:
   - Mon 1-2pm @ D&M 305
   - Wed 9-10am @ D&M 305
   - By appointment

## Student Learning Outcomes

Successful students will: 

 - Understand how to structure data in computer programs, including the roles 
   of several common data structures.
 - Be comfortable writing complex programs in a modern programming language
   like Java.
 - Be able to determine the computational complexity of many algorithms.
 - Practice reading and understanding computer code written by themselves and others.
 - Consider creative solutions to programming problems. 

## Texts

There is no required textbook 🪳 for this course.

# Grading

<table class="table table-striped">
  <thead>
    <tr>
	  <td>Thing</td>
	  <td>Weight</td>
	</tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
	<tr>
	  <td>Labs</td>
	  <td>50</td>
	</tr>
    <tr>
	  <td>Midterm Exam</td>
	  <td>25</td>
	</tr>
    <tr>
	  <td>Final Exam</td>
	  <td>25</td>
	</tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

The number of points available in an assessment may (or may not)
exceed the denominator used in the grade calculation. For example, if
the final exam offers 104 points out of 100, then a perfect score
would count as 26% towards the final course grade.

**Letter grades**

&ge; 93 &rarr; A, &ge; 90 &rarr; A-, <br>
&ge; 87 &rarr; B+, &ge; 83 &rarr; B, &ge; 80 &rarr; B-, <br>
&ge; 77 &rarr; C+, &ge; 73 &rarr; C, &ge; 70 &rarr; C-, <br>
&ge; 67 &rarr; D+, &ge; 63 &rarr; D, &ge; 60 &rarr; D-, <br>
else (&lt; 60) &rarr; F

**Labs**

Lab projects will be assigned weekly throughout the semester. These may
have both programming components and questions to answer. These may be
assigned in pairs, in which case pair programming is strongly suggested.

Lab projects will be provided through an online web application and
must be submitted through the same system. Unsolicited emailed labs
will not be accepted.

A portion of your lab grade may be generated by an automatic grading
script which runs when you submit your work. Unless there is a clear
bug 🪳 in the script, the script output is that portion of your grade
and will not be adjusted manually. You are being graded on getting the
script to give you points. You should review the output, make
corrections, and resubmit before the deadline if you are unhappy with
the script results.

Script grades will be reduced if you submit work inconsistent with the
text or spirit of the assignment, such as hard-coding outputs that
should be calculated.

**Exams**

These will be on paper. Be prepared to write both English and code.

**Grade Appeals**

If you think you recieved an incorrect grade, send me an email
describing why your grade is wrong and how you think it should be
corrected.

If the grade isn't clearly wrong, I will ask you to stop by my office
hours so we can discuss the issue in more detail.

**Fair Grading Policy**

All grading in this class is subject to the university [Fair Grading Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/).

**Late Work**

Work submitted after the deadline loses 1% per hour late.

If you are unable to submit an assignment on time due to a
circumstance covered by the university [Excused Absence Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/)
then you can request an extension. If you are granted an extension and
submit by the extended deadline then the late penalty will be removed.
If such an extension could reasonably be requested before the
assignment deadline then it must be.

**Late Registration**

If you register late for the course please contact the professor to
discuss completing any missed assignments as soon as possible.

**Course Evaluations**

Course evaluations can be a valuable tool to determine how the
semester went. They're more useful with a higher response rate.

To encourage more responses, each class has the chance to earn a 1%
bonus to everyone's final grade. This bonus applies if at least 75%
of the students complete their evaluations by 10am on the Monday
of finals week.

# Resources

## Tutoring

There is evening tutoring in the lab classroom. See the course website
for more details. The [PASS Office](
https://www.plymouth.edu/academics/plymouth-academic-support-services)
also offers individual tutoring.

## Accomodations

Plymouth State University is committed to providing students with
documented disabilities equal access to all university programs and
facilities. If you think you have a disability requiring
accommodations, you should contact Campus Accessibility Services
(CAS), located in Speare (535-3300) to determine whether you are
eligible for such accommodations. Academic accommodations will only be
considered for students who have registered with CAS. If you have
authorized CAS to electronically deliver a Letter of Accommodations
for this course, please communicate with your instructor to review
your accommodations.

# Academic Integrity

Please carefully read and be familiar with the unversity [Academic
Integrity Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/).
Especially don't do any of the things in the list of examples of
academic integrity violations.

For the projects in this class you will be submitting software source
code. To avoid plagiarism, make sure to adhere to the following:

 - You are expected to base your work on any starter code provided with
   the assignment. No further attribution is required.
 - You (or your team) are expected to write your own code. By
   submitting any code that wasn't part of the starter code, you are
   implicitly asserting that it's your (or your team's) work.
 - There will be code examples in class. Submitting code from these
   examples is allowed with attribution. It's also explicitly allowed
   without attribution, but there will be a small grade penalty.
 - All other code is not allowed.
 - Disallowed code submitted with attribution will lose points for
   not doing that part of the assignment.
 - Disallowed code submitted without attribution is
   plagiarism. The academic integrity policy applies.

The simplest way to provide attribution for a chunk of code is a
comment indicating what code needs attribution, who wrote it
initially, where you found it, and whether you significantly changed
it.

Examples:

```java
// This method is based on Planet.getName from Prof. Tuck's lecture 
// notes of Sept 18.

// This method came from StackOverflow user Ashutosh
// https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2393906/java-method-to-swap-primitives
```

Keep in mind that providing project solution code to another student
is also an academic integrity violation.

Discussion of lab projects that doesn't involve specific solution code
is encouraged. Getting the whole class together to draw pictures on
a whiteboard is a valid project strategy.

Partner assignment are expected to be done working together. You have
at least some responsibility for any work submitted for your team.

You may not post solutions for assignments in this class publicly. 

## Tentative Schedule

Assignments will frequently be due at 11:59pm on Monday.

{{< schedule >}}

<tr>
	<td>1</td>
	<td>Aug 28</td>
	<td>Intros: Class, Java, Data</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>2</td>
	<td>Sep 4 †</td>
	<td>Types, Design Templates</td>
	<td>Lab 01</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>3</td>
	<td>Sep 11</td>
	<td>Lists, Generics 🪳</td>
	<td>Lab 02</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>4</td>
	<td>Sep 18</td>
	<td>Arrays, ArrayList</td>
	<td>Lab 03</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>5</td>
	<td>Sep 25</td>
	<td>Stacks</td>
	<td>Lab 04, Midterm Exam</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>6</td>
	<td>Oct 2</td>
	<td>Queues</td>
	<td>Lab 05</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>7</td>
	<td>Oct 9</td>
	<td>Binary Trees</td>
	<td>Lab 06</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>8</td>
	<td>Oct 16</td>
	<td>HashMaps</td>
	<td>Lab 07</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>9</td>
	<td>Oct 23</td>
	<td>Sets, BSTs</td>
	<td>Lab 08</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>10</td>
	<td>Oct 30</td>
	<td>Priority Queue</td>
	<td>Lab 09</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>11</td>
	<td>Nov 6</td>
	<td>Graphs</td>
	<td>Lab 10</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>12</td>
	<td>Nov 13</td>
	<td>Mystery Topic</td>
	<td>Lab 11</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>13</td>
	<td>Nov 20 ‡</td>
	<td>Network Events</td>
	<td>Lab 12</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>14</td>
	<td>Nov 27</td>
	<td>Threads, 🦃</td>
	<td>Lab 13</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>15</td>
	<td>Dec 4</td>
	<td>Wrap-Up, Review</td>
	<td>-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>-</td>
	<td>Dec 11</td>
	<td>Finals Week</td>
	<td>Lab 14, Final Exam</td>
</tr>

{{< /schedule >}}

 - † No class on Monday (Labor Day)
 - ‡ No class Wed, Thu, Fri (Thanksgiving)
 - There may be less than 14 labs.
