---
title: "CS 2470 Spring 2025: Syllabus"
date: "2025-01-17"
---

{{< lead >}}
Systems Programming in C/C++
{{< /lead >}}

[&larr; Back to Course Site](../)

<blockquote>
<b>Course Catalog:</b><br>
Gives students who are already proficient programmers experience in
systems-level programming in C/C++. In particular, students learn how
to create C/C++ programs that interact with the hardware and other
software on a machine. Springs.
<br>Prerequisite(s): CS CS2370
</blockquote>

# Course Info
k
 - Credits: 2
 - Instructor: Nat Tuck 
 - Email: <nathaniel.tuck@plymouth.edu>
 - Office: D&M 305
 - Lecture: Mon, Wed at 10:10-11:00am in D&M 404
 - Office Hours: See https://homework.quest/ 
 - Final Exam Period: [Fri May 9th @ 8:00-10:30am](
 https://www.plymouth.edu/sites/default/files/media/2024-12/spring-2025-final-exam-schedule.pdf
 )
 - Course Site: https://homework.quest/ 

## Student Learning Outcomes

Successful students will: 

 - Be able to write and run low level computer programs to accomplish
   system-level tasks.
 - Be comfortable with the C programming lanuage.
 - Be familiar with basic concepts in Unix-style systems programming

## Texts

Students are not required to purchase a commercial textbook for this course.

Recommended text:

 - The C Programming Language, 2nd Edition, by Kernighan and Ritchie

Freely available textbooks:

 - [Beej's Guide to C](https://beej.us/guide/bgc/)
 - [OSTEP](https://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~remzi/OSTEP/)
 - [Pointers Tutorial](https://github.com/jflaherty/ptrtut13)

# Grading

<table class="table table-striped">
  <thead>
    <tr>
	  <td>Thing</td>
	  <td>Weight</td>
	</tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
	  <td>Homework</td>
	  <td>50</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
	  <td>Labs</td>
	  <td>25</td>
	</tr>
    <tr>
	  <td>Project</td>
	  <td>25</td>
	</tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

The number of points available in an assessment may (or may not)
exceed the denominator used in the grade calculation. For example, if
the final exam offers 104 points out of 100, then a perfect score
would count as 26% towards the final course grade.

**Letter grades**

&ge; 93 &rarr; A, &ge; 90 &rarr; A-, <br>
&ge; 87 &rarr; B+, &ge; 83 &rarr; B, &ge; 80 &rarr; B-, <br>
&ge; 77 &rarr; C+, &ge; 73 &rarr; C, &ge; 70 &rarr; C-, <br>
&ge; 67 &rarr; D+, &ge; 63 &rarr; D, &ge; 60 &rarr; D-, <br>
else (&lt; 60) &rarr; F

**Homework**

Approximately each week there will be a homework assignment to be
completed outside of class.

Minimizing the use of external resources is recommended, and academic
honesty rules will be strictly enforced.

Homework will be posted on Inkfish. Check Inkfish regularly for
upcoming due dates.

Homeworks submitted after the deadline loses 1% per hour late (round
up).

**Labs**

Several times during the semester there will be a lab assignment to
complete during the class period. Labs will only be accepted before
the end of the lab period, and only when submitted from a lab
workstation.

The purpose of this course is to teach the skill of computer
programming. Students need to practice writing programs themselves
without external help. Therefore, the following rules apply to
lab assignments:

 - Personal electronics may not be used. If they are brought to
   lab, they must be kept in a closed container like a backpack.
 - Only approved web resources can be used: Inkfish, the course site,
   provided lecture notes, the textbooks(s), the offical programming
   language documentation, and anything directly linked from the
   current lab assignment.
 - Students who intentionally or repeatedly violate this policy will
   be asked to leave and will not be able to complete that lab
   assignment.
 - These specific rules may be overridden by the instructions in
   individual lab assignments.

During the final exam period we will do one final lab.


**Inkfish and Script Grades**

Labs and homework will be provided through an online web application
called Inkfish and must be submitted through the same system. Any
solutions for lab or homework assignment sent by email will not be
accepted and will incur a 5% grade penalty on the associated
assignment unless the code is sent as a direct reply to an email
requesting it.

A portion of your grade for labs and homework assignments may be
generated by an automatic grading script which runs when you submit
your work. Unless there is a clear bug 🪳 in the script, the script
output is that portion of your grade and will not be adjusted
manually. You are being graded on getting the script to give you
points. You should review the output, make corrections, and resubmit
before the deadline if you are unhappy with the script results.

Script grades will be reduced if you submit work inconsistent with the
text or spirit of the assignment, such as hard-coding outputs that
should be calculated.

**Teams**

You may be assigned to work with a partner. In such cases, pair
programming is required. In assigning partners, sometimes there ends
up being a team of one or (under rare circumstances) three.

All team members are responsible for and get credit for any work
submitted as a team. Keep in mind that pair programming means you
should not be doing work for team assignments on your own.

**Project**

At the end of the semester there will be a programming project.

This is like a homework, but it's larger, more difficult, and worth
more points.

**Grade Appeals**

If you think you recieved an incorrect grade, send me an email
describing why your grade is wrong and how you think it should be
corrected.

If the grade isn't clearly wrong, I will ask you to stop by my office
hours so we can discuss the issue in more detail.

Any grade concerns must be raised within two weeks of the grade being
posted.

**Fair Grading Policy**

All grading in this class is subject to the university [Fair Grading Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/).

**Excused Absences**

If you are unable to submit an assignment or take an exam on time due
to circumstances that were unforseen and reasonably unavoidable
contact the professor to discuss making up the assignment. If you know
you will miss something and are reasonable able to contact the
professor to discuss alternatives beforehand you must do so.
See the
[Excused Absence Policy](https://campus.plymouth.edu/faculty-governance/wp-content/uploads/sites/20/2017/05/PSU-Excused-Absence-Policy.pdf)
for further details.


**Late Registration**

If you register late for the course please contact the professor to
discuss completing any missed assignments as soon as possible.

**Course Evaluations**

Course evaluations can be a valuable tool to determine how the
semester went. They're more useful with a higher response rate. You
should do your course evaluations.


# Resources

## Tutoring

There is evening tutoring in the lab classroom. See the course website
for more details. The [PASS Office](
https://www.plymouth.edu/academics/plymouth-academic-support-services)
also offers individual tutoring.

## Accomodations

Plymouth State University is committed to providing students with
documented disabilities equal access to all university programs and
facilities. If you think you have a disability requiring
accommodations, you should contact Campus Accessibility Services
(CAS), located in Speare (535-3300) to determine whether you are
eligible for such accommodations. Academic accommodations will only be
considered for students who have registered with CAS. If you have
authorized CAS to electronically deliver a Letter of Accommodations
for this course, please communicate with your instructor to review
your accommodations.

# Academic Integrity

Please carefully read and be familiar with the unversity [Academic
Integrity Policy](
https://coursecatalog.plymouth.edu/university-policies-procedures/).
Especially don't do any of the things in the list of examples of
academic integrity violations. Make sure to review the penalties for
repeated offenses.

The primary subject of this class is writing small computer programs.
In order to learn that skill, you need to practice it by completing
the programming assignments by writing code yourself (or with your
team on team assignments).

The following things are obvious cheating:

 - Submitting code that wasn't written by you (or your team).
   - Two exceptions: Starter code supplied with the assignment; small
     examples in the lecture notes, textbook, or official documention.
 - Sharing your soluton code with other students (except teammates).
 - Looking at other solutions to this or similar problems.
 - Accessing unauthorized resources in a lab or exam.

Cheating will be handled as follows:

 - During an exam or lab, if you are caught cheating or acting in a
   way that appears to facilitate cheating (e.g. using unauthorized
   electronics) you will be asked to leave and will not be allowed to
   complete the assignment. In lab, you may get a warning first.
 - The default penalty for cheating on any assignment is zero grade on
   that assignment.

Partner assignment are expected to be done working together. You have
at least some responsibility for any work submitted for your team.

You may not post solutions for assignments in this class publicly. 


## Tentative Schedule

{{< schedule >}}

<tr>
	<td>1</td>
	<td>Jan 20 †</td>
	<td>Introduction</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>2</td>
	<td>Jan 27</d>
	<td>Linux Shell</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>3</td>
	<td>Feb 3</td>
	<td>C Language Intro</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>4</td>
	<td>Feb 10 ‡</td>
	<td>C and Assembly</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>5</td>
	<td>Feb 17</td>
	<td>The Stack</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>6</td>
	<td>Feb 24</td>
	<td>The Heap, Address Space</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>7</td>
	<td>Mar 3</td>
	<td>File I/O</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>8</td>
	<td>Mar 10</td>
	<td>Command parsing</td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>--</td>
	<td>Mar 17</td>
	<td colspan="2" style="text-align: center">---- Spring Break ----</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>9</td>
	<td>Mar 24</td>
	<td>System Call I/O</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>10</td>
	<td>Mar 31</td>
	<td>Processes and fork()</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>11</td>
	<td>Apr 7</td>
	<td>Pipes</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>12</td>
	<td>Apr 14</td>
    <td>Shell logic, continued</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>13</td>
	<td>Apr 21</td>
	<td>A bit about C++</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>14</td>
	<td>Apr 28</td>
	<td>Wrap-up, Review</td>
	<td></td>
</tr>
<tr>
	<td>-</td>
	<td>May 5</td>
	<td>Finals Week</td>
	<td>Final Lab</td>
</tr>

{{< /schedule >}}

 - † No class on Monday, Jan 20 (MLK Day)
 - ‡ No class on Wednesday, Feb 12 (Ski Day)
